As you have learned,
there are many useful annotations that you can use to
configure how JAXB maps classes, fields,
and properties to XML.
But sometimes you might want to map a field or property in a way
that isn't possible with the standard annotations.
Normally you pass a domain model object to the marshaller,
and it will convert it to XML according to JAXB's mapping rules guided by the
annotations that you added and vice versa for unmarshalling.
You can do a lot with the annotations,
but sometimes it's just not possible to get the mapping exactly as you want it.
For such cases, you can write your own adapter class.
The adapter class is called during marshaling to convert the field
in the domain model object to a different object,
which is marshaled instead of the field itself.
During unmarshalling, the opposite happens.
The XML is first unmarshalled into a temporary object,
which the adapter then translates into the type of the
field of the domain model class.
Let's look at an example again, which shows you exactly how this works.
Take a look at example ps-jaxb-11-anno-adapters.
Before we look at the code,
let's run the application and look at the output XML so that you
understand what we are trying to achieve in this example.
Look at how the items appear in the XML.
There's an items element, which contains an item element for each of the items.
Each item element has a productCode attribute,
which contains the productCode and elements for the
fields of the items as child elements.
Now take a look at class PurchaseOrder.
The items field is a map with strings as keys and item objects as values.
The keys in this map are the product codes just like in the previous example.
There's an XmlJavaTypeAdapter annotation on this field,
which specifies that an adapter should be used for
marshalling and unmarshalling this field.
Let's take a look at the adapter class, which is called ItemsAdapter.
This class is a subclass of the abstract class XmlAdapter.
Class XmlAdapter expects two type arguments: the type of the
object that is actually marshalled and unmarshalled and the
type of the field in the domain model.
In this case,
the field in the domain model is a map with strings as
keys and item objects as values.
The object that the map is going to be translated to
and from is of type ItemsWrapper.
We'll take a look at that class in a moment.
Let's first look at the implementation of the adapter.
The adapter must implement two abstract methods that
it inherits from class XmlAdapter.
The Marshal method translates the field from the domain model,
in this case the map with the items, into an ItemsWrapper object.
The Unmarshal method does the opposite,
so it translates an ItemsWrapper object back into a map that can
input in the field in the PurchaseOrder class.
I won't explain the implementation of the methods in detail.
I've used the Java 8 Streams API here to keep it short.
Take some time to study the code for yourself to
discover exactly what's happening here.
Let's take a look at the ItemsWrapper class.
It will explain how we get the XML in the desired form.
The ItemsWrapper class is a simple wrapper class
with a list of item value objects.
The getter method for its items property is annotated with an
XmlElement annotation with the name item.
This is to make it so that we get an element named
item for each item in the list.
Now look at class ItemValue.
This class contains properties for the fields in the item and,
in addition to that, a property named ProductCode,
which is annotated with XmlAttribute.
This is what produces the productCode attribute on each item element in the XML.
Let's quickly summarize this so that you get a good overview of how this works.
There's an items field in class PurchaseOrder.
This causes the items element to be generated in the XML.
When a purchaseOrder is marshalled,
the ItemsAdapter's Marshal method is called to translate the
items field to an ItemsWrapper object.
That ItemsWrapper object is what is actually marshalled
instead of the items field itself.
The ItemsWrapper object has one property, which is a list of ItemValue objects.
The property is annotated with the XmlElement annotation to specify
that the name of the elements in the XML must be item.
Each of the ItemValue objects is marshalled into an item element.
Class ItemValue has a property productCode,
which maps to an attribute on the item start tag.
It also has the same properties as class Item,
which appear as child elements of the item element.
As you see,
adapters give you a lot of flexibility to map fields into whatever structure in XML you need.